Thank you, friends. Thank you. Thank you. So we have the great good fortune of joining
together again for a very brief window of time to reflect on the Buddha Dharma and to
activate the nature within our own hearts and our own minds. So then, as usual, we begin
by activating that nature. So we'll just connect to our Bodhichitta, our genuine
compassion, and our love for all beings. And then we'll kind of turn that on and
then have that a kind of fresh waking wisdom energy kind of guide our
reflection, our study, our practice in this little window of time we have
together. So if we all just take a moment and then kind of turn on Bodhichitta.
So I thought today to kind of speak on the topic of kindness.
Kind to ourselves and kind to each other. And then just in general kind of what it
means to kind of permeate an atmosphere of kindness that other people can just
kind of relax into and be themselves in. So I think in a simple way a lot of the
Buddha Dharma is so vast and so profound just because the nature is so vast and
so profound. Because cause and effect is so vast and so profound. And so it's
always good to come back to some of the essential kind of really key points like
in the end kind of what does it come down to. It's good for me to just kind of
highlight those points in my mind and really touch base with them as Venerable
Kemper Ramichy likes to say to really to get grounded and get settled and just
check in and reactivate like what it what am I doing? How am I spending my time?
How's my how's my practice going? How am I showing up in my life with other
people? I think it's it's good that moment of pause is a special type of
generosity to become like a a kind setting or a kind atmosphere where other
people feel supported to just show up as as they are as themselves. I think this
is a deep Dharma teaching because the nature is always going to unfold as it
does regardless of whether we like it or not or we understand it clearly or not.
Cause and effect keeps happening. It's an infallible system on the relative level
of truth and so like setting a table of just kindness for what might happen today
for who might show up for what emotions might arise for what events what once
unexpected challenges what beautiful surprises like kind of permeate an
atmosphere of kindness of gentleness Sheila or morality in Buddhism is
sometimes venerable Kemper Ramichy's and their door to inconceivable and
compassion door to inconceivable wisdom and compassion they translate morality
sultrum as gentleness which is so deep it's just kindness is one of those key
points in Buddhism that if if we put a lot of time on the cushion and we study
a good amount that in overall it should kind of settle us down and make us more
hospitable hosts to life happening around us we should become more
welcoming of like what's arising in me what thoughts and emotions are arising
in me like kind of have a much more like kind of soft welcoming curious response
like wow what's this happening now or someone you know we kind of come in
contact with someone and like what a big offering that if we can be kind enough
to ourselves to just more or less be like you know kind of baseline like I'm
pretty good with myself and we can free up some energy that when we come in
contact with other people then we can really kind of turn our minds and wonder
like what could I do for this person how could I be a little more accommodating
how could I be a little more skillful a little more kind a little more helpful
and that becomes just a natural kind of turn of mind because we kind of aren't
so much in conflict with ourselves against ourselves according to like
certain standards who were like really tightly trying to hold ourselves to and
then of course then we're not pointed outwards always trying to like hold
everyone to our standards instead we kind of show up according to how they
are and what makes them relax and what makes them happy
like I think as we continue on the path we should become more kind people his
Holiness the 17th Gia Wang Karmapa was giving a talk he was asked to preside
over the final kind of concluding ceremony of his Eminence Thaisa to
Rinpoche his eight-year Mahamudra training session all these people
committed to eight years of daily practice and coming together annually and
so his Holiness Karmapa was going to preside over the concluding ceremony in
front of all these people have put in eight years of time committed to this
kind of Mahamudra training session and his Holiness Karmapa he came to the
event and the main point he emphasized is at the end of all this we should be
good people that if we do really high-level teachings and somehow we end
up not being good people is something went wrong so also his own his Eminence
Thaisa to Rinpoche says Darma is pretty simple be kind and he says everything is
illusory and the third point you are Buddha and this is the three principal
points of the first turning second turning third turning teachings of all
the vast teachings of Buddha are so profound and vast be kind everything's
illusory you are Buddha in a system of cause and effect the best thing we can
do is to be kind to show up in ways that like go with the flow of what's
happening according to like what makes me and others happy what actually makes
us relax and settle and feel supported and like let more of our own innate
brilliance and compassion and kindness come out what actually serves that
purpose so at the very least if it's a complicated cause and effect what's
going on in someone else's mind what's going on in my mind it's so complicated
but at least we can permeate an atmosphere of kindness of gentleness in
that way our morality is like such a generosity for others we're not just
holding ourselves to strict standards we're like creating a space where it's
easy for people to trust us it's easier for people to be like oh this person is
genuinely like sincerely like you know interested in me they're like actually
listening they want to know like what's going on with me they're curious it's
just basic kindness it doesn't have to be so complicated knowing exactly what
helps make someone else happy that's very sophisticated you have to achieve a
exceptional amount of realization of like how cause and effect functions to
have that level precision understanding and awareness so these noble ones that's
why they're so skillful because they hit the remark every time with how all the
vast matrices of cause and effect are they hit the exact point where everyone
can relax a little more in a situation just bursts into like a more fuller more
rich more diverse expression of itself and they know exactly that point to hit
homage to the noble beings but if we're not there yet we can at least like
permeate an atmosphere of like kindness actually showing up with interest in
what's happening around us what's happening in myself instead of seeing
things as being an enemy or something I have to like cower away from Mingier
Rinpoche says our emotions we usually kind of think of them as either an enemy
or a boss an emotion arises anger oh yes I have to go along it's a boss or
anger arises oh there's the enemy I have to target the enemy that's bad so we're
constantly in conflict with ourselves either way we're either serving whatever
happens to pop into our experience and not all of it leads to happiness or
we're constantly trying to like fight it or fix it run away being kind is like
giving something space to like see how see what happens and that really
includes for ourselves like a one way a little more secular way I think and talk
about this is like letting ourselves be human beings this first first point of
Buddha's teaching first turning be a good person and you're just a human we're
just human beings we don't have to be Buddha's yet third turning that there's
Buddha nature that's there's Buddha nature as a potential that doesn't mean
we should pretend we're Buddha's we need to see clearly our potential but first I
have to show up as me and you have to show up as you and we have to create
ours given ourselves an atmosphere where that's okay this is what makes me happy
this is what makes me upset okay now I'm gonna actually deal with reality I have
these habits okay and we kind of have an atmosphere of kindness so simple but so
difficult to do right because we're very like complicated beings it's so many
habits which is beautiful we're very there's so much richness to work with be
kind then secondly it's all illusory like what experience have we had that
doesn't become a memory if we really try to trace where is this memory of
yesterday where is this youth I keep looking back to where is this big plan
that's gonna happen you know it's upcoming vacation or the you know where's
my grievance really someone wronged me and I keep repeating that story in my
mind and like where is it if we really try to be a little you know clear clear
minded about it where is it actually happening it's just memory it's just a
memory happening in our mind what we can know is certainty in Buddha Dharma is
awareness is happening memories happening anticipations happening this
present moments happening the awareness is happening that we can certainly know
it's self-evident but it changes as it happens it constantly moves as it
happens it's illusory there's really nothing we can hold on to and so we have
to really kind of
then we get to see what it's like when when we don't go along with the
illusory nature and we want to keep everything locked in place we get to
directly experience what that feels like does it help our happiness or does it
not that's a something we all get to see for ourselves just because it's a dream
like it doesn't mean it doesn't happen it still happens it's just constantly
unfolding there's just no fixed anything we can find in it even a fixed to me or
a fixed you so all of a sudden it's very flexible it's illusory we have a lot of
freedom to really like put our mind to what we want to put it to it's actually
very empowering that it's illusory we can make it a really really really
really good dream but it's only ever gonna be a dream we can make this such a
good dream for each other we be kind to ourselves free up a little space and
energy all of a sudden all that becomes available with how we're engaging with
each other and then we can really become like a friend to everyone they said that
buddha shakimuni was a friend to everyone even if they didn't know it he's so kind
then you are Buddha Buddha nature's here the third turning teaching if it's
illusory and totally flexible and everything's always kind of happening and
dissolving as it happens there's nothing we can really hold on to forever in any
kind of a fixed statics permanent way if everything's constantly arising and
dissolving arising and dissolving and we start to kind of settle down our minds
with some kindness and clarity and like start to actually see this is actually
how this is happening if we look at material things or immaterial mental
things like that is actually how it's happening all the time then what starts
to come out is all these loving qualities this Buddha nature comes out
when we loosen up what we find is this incredible power the power of the Buddha
nature of our own natural goodness so this becomes a normal type of kindness
like his only style alama my religion is kindness all the sudden this is talking
about the expression of the Buddha nature and which is exceptionally
profound teaching and so many in sutras even to even consider the possibility
that all Buddhas are all beings have a Buddha nature the merit of just for a
moment considering that everyone has Buddha nature it's like so much vastly
more special than just seeing oh one moment of impermanence and the Buddha
taught also the conception that everything is impermanent is like the
elephant put footprint all other footprints fit within that it's the best
conception we can have isn't the idea that it's all impermanent but even
compared to that just to just to allow the possibility maybe everyone is just
fundamentally has this awakened enlightened energy this nature is always
good it can never not be good what a kindness that would be that's how we
engage with each other that's how we see ourselves I'm fundamentally not broken
I'm fundamentally good everything is fundamentally has this enlivened
enlightened nature Buddha nature and then we start like kind of working with
that with people first instead of the things we see that we don't like or the
our you know mind we're like having a biological experience and so my mind
picks out the things that are scary or disgusting and my framework or like kind
of trigger me in some way and so I always look at what's wrong it's like how
I that's the survival instinct of evolution but evolutionary biology it's
like helped us keep going but it doesn't serve in this context to actually see
the Buddha nature first not the 1% thing that's off but to see that part of
ourselves that are there regardless of whatever else shows up the unchanging
Buddha nature and I think this is when it really becomes a question of like how
can we actually handle the complexity of life because it's so complicated there's
so many things to juggle we want to be kind but we keep getting hurt we want to
see that it's illusory but it's really hard this third turning point of there's
Buddha nature everyone has it no one's left out and it's unchanging it's always
there fundamentally pure each of us what an what an awesome generosity that is no
matter what mistakes we make no matter what we say wrong no matter how we mess
up no matter what we win what victory we have that we all equally have the exact
same Buddha nature which is perfect and stainless and can never be altered or
interrupted that's such an amazing extraordinary depth of kindness and it
can show up in infinite varieties of ways it doesn't have to show up in the
way I want it it can show up in countless ways this Buddha nature we
give everyone the space to show up how they want to show up so kind then we can
actually serve beings in helpful ways not force anything on them these three
points are so deep be kind it's illusory you are Buddha or you could say you have
Buddha nature these are three principal points you know this is really first
turning second turning third turning or foundational Buddhism sutra Mahayana
that's a pinnacle of Madhyamaka that goes into the Madhyamaka into Shintong
with the Buddha nature teachings and then on top of that are in addition
these are like coiled wires right we have kindness wire and then we have the
illusory wire and then we have the Buddha nature wire and then we have all these
skillful means and methods to actually recognize this right now this fundamental
goodness we have right now and that's in the very fabric of all experience this
illusory emptiness fabric all these wires are coiled together and they make a
single wire and that single wire is Vajrayana and we don't get Vajrayana
without all the wires together I have to have kindness in the illusory nature and
Buddha nature and then we add on the skillful profound means like vast
skills and methods where once we really think this is we try to show up with
kindness this is all illusory manifestation and it's fundamentally
good then we have the foundation for these skillful means to arise we can use
any experience any sense experience any moment to help us reconnect with that
goodness in ourselves and others and then it becomes not so much like oh I'm
Vajrayana when I'm sitting down in a session and I get up and I'm just
rock-but-normal ordinary person then we can try to be you know Vajradhara all
the time or Chenrezig all the time or Amitabha all the time or whatever the
specific set of skillful means in the mandala we're working with and we can
keep kind of re weaving into that mandala our daily experiences because we
have these foundations of kindness illusory nature Buddha nature in a
single unified synthesis then Vajrayana is a natural next step it just happens
you can't even stop it it just would come
so these are just three a few simple things I think it's good to check it's
really it's good to come back to the basics the basics are just the heart and
the lungs and the brain and the it's all these are all needed for us to you know
use our time really really well and then at the same time just it's just even a
moment of contemplating kindness emptiness illusory nature Buddha nature
devotion so then that goes into Vajrayana pure perception and devotion any
little moment of reflecting on this or putting this into practice is such a
beneficial kind accommodating exceptionally important use of our time
it's like directly connected to our own natural goodness and if we connect our
own natural goodness all the sudden we become an atmosphere that someone else
when they come in contact with us they can relax finally I can relax and be
myself and then what happens is then their Buddha nature their natural
goodness starts just sparking out and their own amazing unique surprising
waves and then we can co-create cultures of all these different unique brilliant
insightful ways of coming together because we fundamentally are like like
created an atmosphere of kindness and attentiveness and curiosity and like
playful fun it's not so fixed and rigid it's not so tight and said according to
what any one of us want but we're really co-creating something and we get this
elegance all these seemingly divergent variant things come together in unified
streams and we create these beautiful harmonious communities these sanghas
right and the largest level of Sangha is all sentient beings all sentient beings
are part of the Sangha and then we get all Buddhists and then we get all you
know it goes smaller and smaller how we define Sangha then we get Vajrayana
practitioners then we get the Sangha that's actually received the pith
instructions at the feet of a master at the same time but in the biggest
context of Sangha we're all Sangha every single being is part of our Sangha
they're all welcome to come to this party and we have to set a place for
every one of them that's our job as a bodhisattva what did this person what
did they want to eat tonight for dinner what makes them happy because we put a
little piggy in a British you know table setting that won't make the piggy happy
piggy one's a big thing of mud that's what makes a big happy
kindness is really taking the time what makes you happy I'm gonna actually pause
my own internal this and that I'm gonna be kind enough to myself to trust oh I'm
a good person so I'm gonna pause all this internal conflict for just even a
moment and then all of a sudden it opens up what makes you happy what would you
like right now then we're talking about actual friendship this has to be a
foundation for actual community for trusting each other for working through
challenging times together for sharing our resources for learning from each
other it's like really has to be founded on these deep levels of friendship and
kindness mutual respect my religion is simple
kindness right his only sala lama says but it goes all the way through the
Yana's of the Buddha Dharma all the way into the innermost Yana's to become like
a really genuinely concerned loving host and then set the table as if like the
most honored treasured guest is coming and then that's called a moment of life
and we constantly are trying to reset that table and then we go and another
person is invited and we share a little moment or two with them and then we
reset the table and another person's invited and they come and we don't play
favorites and choose who shows up to our event it's really open door and people
keep coming and experiences keep happening and we keep being kind and
showing up and it just an atmosphere where people can relax and our own
natural goodness can come out and then the deep power of the Buddha nature can
really start to shine and then we can be supported by all these lineage blessings
and all these profound instructions and practices we have that when we start
relaxing in deeper and deeper ways we start letting ourselves settle down and
showing up for like what's going on in me now that oftentimes a lot of
resistance will come up because we're just not used to being that
accommodating to ourselves and so we've like tucked away a lot of little pockets
where we're not really so comfortable looking at yet being conscious of and
so these pockets of unconscious kind of habits will come up and at that point
that's really where these lineage blessings and these profound techniques
are so vitally important we need these supportive structures in order to relax
again and relax again and relax again and we have like a full nundra practice
and the sadhana has a noble beginning noble middle noble conclusion and like
we can settle ourselves within that rise and set of each cycle we don't have to
recreate it every time we can relax into the boundary relax into the context the
container the setting it's like a womb or it's like that you know how we're
being held we can use that limitation actually to like find that kindness and
that illusory nature the Buddha nature in ourselves in each moment and we owe such
a big gratitude for all these noble beings who've like shared these
teachings with us and are continuing to preserve them and spread them and then
also to the kindness of our parents the kindness of our friends the kindness of
ourselves that we keep showing up we keep really trying to bring out love we
keep trying to honor trying to listen like the genuinely like we it's so
amazing we all keep showing up to this party and here we get another
opportunity to set the table oh what's gonna make you happy and then we can
play a little bit you know and doesn't have to be some big deal it can just be
like a nice mutually shared kind of uplifting thing and then it's illusory
it goes and then we have another so really how wonderful thank you all for
showing up again and again and again I really pray that every single one of us
all of our Sangha sisters and brothers every single sentient being we all keep
showing up in a loving accommodating kind way because there's no escape we're
all gonna keep showing up anyway so we might as well just be kind like the
logic of it is really tight so why not you know go right to the fruition now
because the Buddha nature is just kindness nature of mind is just unfettered
completely unrestricted kindness utterly accommodating of all experience doesn't
play any favorites or exclude anything it's completely allowing so thank you
for all showing up thank you to the great masters for really preserving and
turning this wheel of Dharma again and again and again and really so now we
have this little session together we'll do this do Jim Taresar Nundro and we'll
begin with his Holiness do you remember chase spontaneous prayer calling llama
from afar reconnecting to this goodness in ourselves and allowing it to just
really saturate our experience thank you all so much thank you
that's page 18 and the do Jim Taresar Nundro page 18
you
the essence primordially unchanging the innate nature free from elaboration
dwells as the youthful vase body the originally pure profound clarity
Dharmakaya Lama yeshe Dorje be aware of me please grant the blessings to attain
great confidence in the view the nature unceasing conjoined configuration of
luminous clarity dwells as the display of the spontaneously present five
certainties Sambo Gakaya Lama ditching Dorje be aware of me please grant the
blessings to perfect great ability and meditation the compassion without bias
the primordial wisdom free from all limitations dwells as the essence of all
pervading naked awareness emptiness nirvana Kaya Lama drilled or Lingpa be
aware of me please grant the blessings to accomplish great progress and action
the primordial ground of one's own awareness is unchanging and unmoving
whatever arises as the expression of the Dharmakaya is neither good nor bad
since awareness of nowness is actually the Buddha the completely free serene
Lama is revealed in one's innermost heart when this original mind is
realized as the very nature of the Lama there's no need for whining contrived
prayers made with grasping and attachment by letting go in the free
natural flow of uncontrived awareness not holding whatever arises the blessings
of self liberation are obtained through fabricated practice there is no time to
achieve enlightenment this meditation produced through mental analysis and
intellect is a deceiving enemy now conceptualization falls apart with the
abandon of a madman let this life be spent in a state of uninhibited naked
ease whatever one does joyful practitioner of the great perfection and
any company happy lineage holder of the lotus-born protector without rival great
treasure of healing Lama teachings beyond compare heart essence of the
dakinis having to spell the hearts darkness great ignorance in its own
place the undiminished son of luminous clarity shines continuously this good
fortune is the kindness of the Lama the only father unrepayable kindness only
remember the Lama unrepayable kindness only remember the Lama unrepayable
kindness only remember the Lama